---
title: Cuba
date: 2022-06-01T15:32:11.733Z
slug: travel/2022-06-01-cuba
tags:
  - Travel
  - Travel(Cuba)
---

Cuba had been in 2018 the destination for our honeymoon. Friendly staff greeted us, a variety of food was available, and, despite nearly 6 decades of trade sanctions and embargo from the United States, there were little signs of shortage. Between a menu optimized towards domestic production and continued trade and support with Russia, this small island nation managed to provide a complete experience for tourists.

For locals, the limited outcomes from decades of state communism were not lost on them. But what could they do? Exit Visas were hard to come by, and leaving family behind forever to flee to Miami still took a leap of faith.

# Continued Descent

In 2022, Cuba was markedly different. Two years of decimated tourism from COVID-19 lockdowns, mandates, and travel restrictions had disrupted the fragile economy reliant on tourism and the resulting inflow of foreign currency. Exasperated by the ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict and disruptions to trade and support from Russia, shortages were impacting every aspect of the island.

The Pullman Cayo Coco resort in the first week of June was half vacant. There was nearly no variety day-to-day of offerings in the buffet (unlike in 2018) – the recurring diet of breakfast omlette; lunch calamari, rice, beans, fries, sliced peppers; and dinner shrimp, rice, beans, fries, and sliced peppers had few alternatives throughout the week. Coffee was watered down – previously a rich tone, milk was watered down, there was no yoghurt – a staple in previous years, napkins had been cut in two with scissors with logos that were from a different resort to stretch them further, previous selections of whisky from around the world were now limited to a few awful local productions, bartenders would submit orders for drink ingredients and await whatever partial fulfillment arrived the next week – usually lacking most of what was ordered, mini-bars in rooms were left unstocked other than a single 1.5L bottle of water per day – as we were leaving a maid told us of a pending bottled water shortage.

The beach did not disappoint, nor did the alcoholic drinks where no shortage in Havanna Club rum supported the frequent pina colada and mojito orders.

Where workers were appreciative of shampoo and toiletries gifts which were expensive in 2018, they now bemoaned that they couldn't even find clothes in stock for their growing children as store after store had empty shelves for months. Occasional shipments would disappear quickly at high prices.

The oft-remarked friendly, welcoming, upbeat attitude attributed to the Cuban people has begun to fade as the dreary, ever shrinking prospects of daily life grind down the people year after year, generation after generation. And who can blame them.

# Currency

Since 2018 the Cuban monetary system has been through drastic changes too. In 2018, there were two currencies on the island: the Cuban peso – the currency for domestic trade between locals, and the Cuban convertible peso (known as CUC) – an intermediary currency that tourists converted their foreign currency into and tipped or paid for extras on resort.

Notably, upon receiving any tips in CUC, Cuban workers were required to convert them at a bank to the domestic Pesos. Whether at the currency exchange at the resort or the bank counter, the government enforced punitive exchange rates which extracted value at each point.

We were surprised upon arrival to find the CUC gone and welcome acceptance of foreign currency directly for all tipping and per diems fees. The plastic tip cup on the beach grill counter would be filled with a collection of Euros, Canadian bills, and American dollars, all trying to win the favour of the fried fish giver. Piles of toonies and loonies would mark the counters behind the omelette and pasta stations, with staff asking friendlier tourists if they could be so kind as to exchange some of the heavy coins for bills.

As we learned – and should have expected, all this foreign currency was not serving to bolster individual workers against the ever rising inflation and dismal domestic monetary conditions. But as previously, all foreign currency was required to be deposited and immediately converted to domestic Pesos at the bank – at a punitive government exchange rate, less the populus preserve their savings under their matteress. And notably, the bank only accepted bills – no coins, and perfect untarnished or ripped bills at that. One bill I offered to exchange for coins with a staff member was returned to me when upon inspection he found a slight tear which he told me would not let it be accepted at the bank.

While most tourists do their perceived part and tip often, the dreary prospects of it being split across all staff and then not even personally benefitting them much reduced my personal motivation. Tipping at the tourist resorts ends up being just another way to fund the regime, with some minor benefit to the families of staff, and no direct improvement on the life of many Cubans with no familial ties to the resort economy. On a practical basis, I did do my part and bring back a bag of coins, leaving many bills behind to reduce the stress on staff belts holding up ever heavy pant pockets of Canadian currency.

# Boycott

After visiting Cuba again, the recurring scorn from family for visiting Communist countries and in the media of supporting dictatorial regimes falls flat. What has a multi-decade embargo accomplished but the mass impoverishment of a nation? Was freedom and democracy spread successfully as a result of the trade opening of China at the end of the 20th century? The causal relationship between trade and citizen freedom is an oft-used barbed bat to club into submission any who dare to stray from the state sanctioned embargos, yet in practice seems to have nearly no affect.

The sole liberating import could be the Internet as has been seen in countless protests and movements that would not have been possible without it in Cuba, Iran, Vietnam, China, Canada, the United States, and Europe in recent years.

Trade and travel restrictions serve no benefit to Canadian tourists or family members seeking to be reunited, and reduction nor increase of trade profits to regimes serve no induction to the liberating of their people. The restrictions are punitive and only continue from the unwashed masses subservience to nominally elected governments who would rather act as prison guard against other countries who step out of line than implement any wholistic policy that serves to better the lives of people in all countries.

The endless wars must continue on all fronts including economic, and unfortunately for now, including Cuba.
