---
title: Buying a House in 2021?
date: 2020-11-29T00:00:00.000Z
slug: finance/2021-buying-a-house
tags:
	- Finance
	- Finance(Housing)
---

For easier reading, I've summarized my recent findings and investigation into the question of purchasing a personal family home in the following post. Other posts in the finance category have more detailed investigation and references for the more complex terms or historical examples given here.

**tldr; Renting or buying can be the better decision in different markets and in different personal finance situation. For us, buying a house currently appears to be advantageous given the Kitchener-Waterloo market, tax incentives, maxed out TFSAs, increasing risk of inflation/currency devaluation, and long term credit flexibility offered by a house.**

# Buy

* Currency Devaluation: The risk of currency devaluation as a monetary tool to deleverage the extensive national debts brought on by COVID would result in nominal prices on assets including stocks, gold, houses, and physical tools rising regardless of the supply, demand, and other factors of each asset class.
	* Without an inflation adjusted salaried job (primarily only available if unionized or working for government), cost of living and home price to wage ratios will continue to increases with the hope of modest salary adjustments upwards about as good as can be expected. The loss of purchasing power could be significant.
	* Purchase of a home locks in housing prices at current nominal levels, and a currency devaluation results in you paying back the bank with less valuable dollars over time, which leaves you better off provided that the mortgage debt is in the same currency that your income is earned and you can maintain your income source through the inflationary period.
* Rent vs Buy: For a 3 bedroom house in Kitchener-Waterloo, rent runs on average from $2000-2500 and home prices from $500-900k depending on location and finish. With our personalized inputs based on a large down payment input into a Rent vs Buy calculator, our total throw away costs (mortgage interest + utilities + property tax + maintenance) for buying are near equivalent or lower than renting (rent + utilities).
* Minimal Cash Flow Difference to Renting with Smith Maneuver: The key insight of the Smith Maneuver isn't necessarily the common one of making your mortgage interest tax deductible, but getting to maintain higher leverage ratios and limit the use of cash flow to only go into the real estate asset class. This is done by having a readvanceable mortgage + HELOC where for each additional mortgage payment the principal amount increases the HELOC credit limit. You can then withdraw that amount from the HELOC and invest in the same way you would had you been renting and that cash flow had not gone to the mortgage payment.
* Income Splitting with Smith Maneuver: Another benefit to the readvanceable mortgage + HELOC => investment account with Smith Maneuver is that the investment account can be put in the name of the lower earning spouse, funded through the HELOC (which has a credit limit derived from the house down payment and mortgage payment which presumably was funded more by the higher earning spouse), and then any capital gains in that account are attributed to the lower income earning spouse. For the case of a family with maxed out TFSAs, the higher earning spouse could even liquidate their TFSA, put the money towards the house mortgage principal, which extends the HELOC limit, and then flow those investments into the lower incoming spouse's investment account. This is notably different from a joint margin account where the capital gains are attributed to the joint account holder by contribution percentage, thus the higher income earner couldn't fund a margin account and then have the lower income earner claim the capital gains for tax reduction purposes. The above Smith Maneuver income split works since the house is jointly owned and so any usage of the HELOC can be done by either spouse. Maxing it for the lower income spouse and liquidating the higher income
* Long Term Asset to Borrow Against: Over time as your house builds equity, it becomes one of the few (see only for most people) assets that you can own and easily (and at low cost) borrow against through a HELOC or refinancing. After weeks of inquiries and research earlier in 2020, it became clear that nearly no bank wants to extend similar borrowing against asset lines of credit for other asset classes like a stock portfolio (most banks didn't offer it, some required physical paper share certificates, others had higher than usual transaction costs and limited trading abilities). Having house equity that can be borrowed against provides flexibility in the future to be your own bank and extend (via a bank) to yourself credit at the lowest rate around.
* Mortgage Improves Credit Score: Counter intuitively, taking on a lot of debt via mortgage often can increase your credit score, provided you make every payment on time, which makes it easier in the future to take on another mortgage for an investment property or other more productive forms of debt.
* Real Estate Price Appreciation: Given the current trend prompted by COVID of flight from big cities like Toronto to smaller cities and suburbs including Hamilton, Guelph, and Kitchener-Waterloo, continued price appreciation in these cities could buck forecasted downturns in 2021 since the forecasts are reporting on average national price movement which includes Alberta real estate (hit hard by drop in oil price) and major cities like Toronto and Vancouver which have had more drastic (and arguably less sustainable) price run ups in recent years, especially in condo markets (which now are the primary real estate class that have seen price drops).
* Capital Gains Tax Exemption: The gain on sale from a house price appreciating over time is still exempt from capital gains taxes in Canada, which for long term holding of real estate can have a significant effect on personal finances.

# Don't Buy

* Interest Rate Risk: US Federal Reserve central bank has given guidance on maintaining near 0% rates through until 2023-2024. Canadian Central Bank policy since the 1980s has been to march fairly inline with US monetary policy to minimize trade implications from the follow on effects on the Canadian Dollar from a vastly different interest rate from the US Dollar.
	* That being said, interest rates rising would cause a mortgage payment of $1588 @ 1.44% on a 20% down $500k house to rise to $1982 @ 3.89% (2000-2010 rate average), $2591 @ 7.23% (1990-2000 rate average), or $3561 @ 11.92% (1980-1990 rate average). Considering affordability in light of these probability adjusted possible outcomes is necessary given the magnified impact of interest rate changes.
	* If you have a separate stock portfolio and a mortgage, and in the future interest rates rise, you can make the tradeoff at that point whether to more aggressively pay down the mortgage or leave your stocks invested where they are. In some cases, the stocks will grow at a higher rate than the interest rate increase and leaving them is better. In others, paying down the mortgage faster and reducing the impact of the interest rate rise is optimal. Without this stock portfolio to hedge against potential rate increases, a more conservative house purchase budget would be prudent.
* Large real estate price drop: The much foretold Canadian housing crash has yet to materialize. Prices  in major cities have doubled over the past decade, tripled over the past two decades. Yet, in contrast to the purely central bank caused Japanese asset bubble of the late 1980s, Canada has a ways to go before this is a purely predictable bubble ready to pop.
	* The Japanese bubble prompted by drastically expanded loan giving requirements set on commercial banks by the Japanese central bank saw people buying 2 or 3 homes with commercial banks begging people to take on more debt so they could fulfill their loan giving quota set by the central bank.
	* Notably, this strange centralized loan quantity system was a carry on from the wartime economy structure of Japan that lasted from the post-WWII reconstruction in the 1940s and 1950s through until the 1990s when the central bank, through forcing up the asset bubble and then popping it and causing the Japanese "Lost Decade", had caused enough carnage to force the Japanese legislature to pass the economic restructuring reforms to move Japan away from the wartime economy and towards the more common capitalist, financial markets as seen in the United States and Europe.
	* All of this to say, the Japanese asset bubble saw [stocks rise by 300-400% and land prices rise by 51% to 302% from 1985 to 1991](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_asset_price_bubble), followed by a [60% drop in stock prices and 70% drop in land prices](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/economics/08/japan-1990s-credit-crunch-liquidity-trap.asp), with even more drastic [99% price drop in 'A' Tokyo financial district property and over 90% price drop in Tokyo residential homes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_asset_price_bubble).
	* Canada's real estate market, though resulting in a highly indebted citizenry, does not appear in most places to be a bubble in the form of a central bank fueled multi-year pump Japanese bubble.
	* Nor does the Canadian real estate rise have causes that mirror the United States 2000s housing bubble that crashed in 2007 which largely was caused by overly loose loan standards, originally put forth as a way to open home ownership to poorer people. Canada's mortgage standards leave room for many shadier deals where borrowed money is used for down payments or B-lenders grant mortgages to families that likely can't sustainably service it for the full term, but the majority of mortgages from limited statistics appear to be to people who can service the debt and has not prompted the multi-home buying speculatory behaviour that were seen frequently pre-2007 in Florida and Nevada (or in the 1980s in Japan).
	* Canada's real estate prices have most certainly had upwards pressure from new demand brought online from the prolonged (and likely lasting into the future) low interest rate environment. Low interest rates have also pushed upwards other assets like stocks, and recent currency devaluation from printing money to monetize lavish government debts to pay for COVID benefits serve to further push up both stocks and real estate nominal prices. Though vulnerable to pop if central banks suddenly hike rates, the following carnage will likely prompt central banks to choose a quieter deleveraging through continued currency devaluation than a drastic tightening and ensuing real estate crash which many on the sidelines have been hoping for. Given the example of Japan though, central banks could certainly pop the bubble if sufficiently warranted by a hidden motive. Balancing these potential outcomes could lead you to land on one side or the other of the ongoing real estate price risk.
* Canada's Downfall could motivate mobility: In the event that Canada descends into civil disorder or becomes so unproductive such that jobs and companies move to other countries, leaving Canada would be warranted. That being said, Canada's productivity stagnation problems though dire if the goal is to become as productive and innovative as the United States or China, will not likely lead to the swift downfall that would otherwise be caused by civil war, foreign invasion, draught, or famine. Though all of these remain non-0 risks, the probability likely warrants some tail risk hedges and not resting the entire house purchase decision on these tail risks.
* Renting provides maximum personal mobility: Without a doubt, yet at times that mobility is forced when a landlord wants to increase rents and kicks out tenants for "renovations". The broader question of what you are using this call option on mobility for can help determine whether it's worth continuing to rent purely to maximize this mobility optionality. For our case, long term proximity to family and seemingly continued robust economic prospects in Kitchener-Waterloo motivate us to trade some personal mobility for the above benefits to purchasing a house.
* Renting minimize maintenance downside risk: A house is a big pile of bricks, wood, wiring, pipes, and drywall sitting on a plot of dirt. Any number of things could go wrong leading to costly repairs, or at a minimum annually require upkeep maintenance. Renting offloads that risk to the landlord eliminating the downside cost (and time) exposure that comes with home ownership of repairs like new roofs, cracked foundations, or water damage from a pipe burst which could lead to tens of thousands of dollars in expenses.
* Renting minimizes transaction costs to enable space flexibility: If your family situation changes and you need more (or less) space going forward, moving to a new house carries such high transaction cost that if it is done more than once every 5-10 years (if not longer), many of any price gains from those years can be drastically reduced by the tens of thousands of dollars in commission and transaction fees. Renting provides the flexibility to move to a larger or smaller space at the maximum cost of 2 months of double rent if you don't time it well.
