---
title: "Wanting: The Power of Mimetic Desire in Everyday Life"
date: 2022-10-02 00:00:00
slug: books/wanting
tags:
  - Books
  - Author(Luke Burgis)
---

**2021 | Luke Burgis**

Rene Girard and the application of his theories on mimetic desire (imitation of what others want), the resulting resource rivalry, and mechanisms to disengage from the collision using the scapegoat mechanism; left a profound impression on Luke Burgis as he was seeking a better way to explain his, in retrospect hard to justify, life choices.

Even for myself, after listening to the famous CBC interviews with Girard, the concepts of a mimetic or anti-mimetic model resonated in realizing how I would attempt to copy those I looked up to or act in the opposite way of people in my life I disliked, in both cases my actions and desires deterministic on someone else's, not my own.

Even in friendships, Girard's theories help to explain the sense of rivalry I've sometimes encountered that can lead to increasing bristles of friction or outright competitiveness despite you both being friends with each other. Unless someone deliberately disengages from the rivalry, friendships or other relationships can unravel.

While the scapegoat mechanism was less new to me, it was a good reminder of how even today in cancel culture, the sacrific and focused violence on one to avoid the war between the many is a clarifying mental model. It is a reminder to not be very skeptical of the mob mindset which in the moment can morally justify the most attrocious actions while in the grip of trying to resolve a mimetic episode through focused scapegoating.

For those new to Girard's ideas, Burgis presents a readable, well articulated explanation of his ideas, personal anecdotes of how they've applied in his own life, and action items to help the reader be more self-aware of how they are affecting their own life.

Notably, mimetic desire and its consequences is not presented as something that can be escaped, but like an alcoholic at Alcoholics Anonymous, something to be aware of as part of your nature and actively steered away from, to avoid the disasters that otherwise would, by human nature, naturally unfold.
